---
title: Vertigo
description: The feeling and science behind my Vertigo saga
tags: Haskell Health
vertigo: true
---

In April 2019, I came down with a nasty case of vertigo that lasted a month.
Since then it would come and go, never reaching the original peak but also never
recovering fully. After a long journey with several specialists, I met with an
Otolaryngologist at Johns Hopkins Medicine, where I was cured.

Along the way, I learned a surprising amount of fun science. In this blog post,
I'll share a bit about how the episode felt, what I learned and what it feels
like to go through Vertigo.

## The symptoms

### Nystagmus

The main symptom of Vertigo of course is dizziness, a feeling that the room is
spinning. This can be fun when you induce it yourself, but gets old quickly.
When dizziness is chronic, it can be very difficult to get work done and to help
with childcare. Driving is out of the question.

<div id="vertigo-simulator"></div>

<em>Thanks, I hate it</em> is the correct reaction.

### Displacement

Even when my world was not spinning, my head never felt like it was perfectly
fixed in space. The sensation is hard to discribe, but, imagine that when you
try to focus on something in the distance, that thing is always vibrating just a
little bit, side-to-side and up-and-down, very quickly. Distant objects felt
like they were spread out a little, not perfectly fixed in space. Being
perfectly fixed in space is very much a feeling that we take for granted. You
only recognize it after you lose it for a while.

### Noise

The last symptom I felt is much harder to describe - something like the
sensation of nails on a chalkboard (but silent), or at times, the feeling or a
laser beam of corrupted data, eminating out the back of my head and toward the
left. I haven't heard others describe anything like this with their vertigo. But
for me, it was highly correlated with times of dizziness, and very
uncomfortable. In the early days before the dizziness got strong, there was a
feeling of a very soft corkscrew slowly rotating in my skull - this was actually
pleasant.


## The inner ear

Several players came together to give me my vertigo, and a detailed
understanding of them results in a clickbait-worthy "One weird trick" to correct
the problem without any drugs or extensive therapy.

### Hair Cells

Consider the [hair cell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hair_cell), the cells in
the cochlear that are excited by the fluid oscillations causd by sound waves.
They have a lot of special adaptations that allow them to meet some difficult
constraints - being sensitive enough to detect tiny vibrations, while remaining
sensitive and not being torn to pieces by vibrations that are 10 orders of
magnitude larger.

These cells' mix of sensitivity and resilience is wild, and the mechanisms
surely were not easy for evolution to come by. So as she does, Mother Nature
found other uses for them.

### Vestibular sensation

The exact same type of cell is used for two sensations that seem completely
unrelated to hearing - the static sense of head orientation, and the sense of
head rotation.


To detect static head orientation, we need to make use of gravity. Imagine you
are a Dutchman, you have your buttered toast with chocolate sprinkles (above
figure, right side). Put hair cells under the butter, and lean your toast
forward, the weight of sprinkles will pull them forward, and this is detected by
the hair cells. In the inner ear, instead of sprinkles we have heavy calcium
crystals called <em>otoconia</em>. And instead of butter, we have a kind of
jelly.

![Vestibular organs: https://www.britannica.com/science/utricle](/images/2019-12-20-britannica.jpg)

To detect rotation of the head, each ear has three ring-shaped tracks, roughly
aligned with the three spatial axes. The rings are filled with fluid, which has
some inertia and does not spin as quickly as the rest of the head, when the
direction of head spin matches the orientation of the ring. Again, hair cells
embedded in jelly sit at the base of the rings and are stimulated by the speed
difference between the ring's fluid and the ring wall. These rings are called
the <em>semicircular canals</em>, and they are large enough to see in a MRI
scan. If you'd like to see my semi-circular canals, feast your eyes.

![My MRI Brain scan, Mercy Neurology department](../images/2019-12-20-canalsMRI.jpg)


## Trouble in science paradise

Look back at the Britannica diagram, and notice the area colored pink. This
includes both the utricle/saccule with their otoconia, and also the semicircular
canals. Although they are separate organs, they are part of the same congiguous
fluid-filled area. Part of the cochlea, too, lies in the same fluid bath.

Like any open office plan, this setup has problems. The otoconia crystals
sometimes dislodge from their jelly and float into the semicircular canal. A
crystal in the canal is not something that the vestibular system can easily cope
with. The heavy crystals interfere with the motion of the fluid in the canals
during head rotation. And when the head becomes stationary, a crystal under the
force of gravity creates a ficticious sense of head movement.

## One weird trick...

One of my great laments about science is that we develop appealing models and
simple stories, but they fall over for one reason on another in the face of
simple predictions and extrapolations.

Loose crystals from one sensory organ tresspassing into the working end of
another sesnory organ is a simple model. What made my vertigo story so
delightful to me was the way that model works in practice, to effect a cure that
requires no drugs or prolonged therapy. The treatment is called the Epley
Maneuver.

If (a) crystals can get into the semicircular canals, (b) this cause problems when
crystals move and interfere with fluid sensors and (c) the shapes of the canals
are well known, then perhaps by rotating the head a certain way we could coax
the crystals back through the canals and into the utricle/saccule where they
belong? A bit like the "Lucky Labrynth" toy with a marble navigated through a
maze on a balance board you control with knobs?

![Lucky Labrynth](/images/2019-12-20-lucky-labrynth.jpg)

Well, for that subset of vertigo cases where loose crystals are the cause, it
does work. And one has to wonder, when Epley first tried it successfully, was
this a Eureka! moment for him, or with total confidence in the crystal
hypothesis did he shrug the maneuver's success off as trivial.

When the right side (most commonly, the hindmost of the three canals) is the
problem, the crystals tend to settle at a low point in the ring, and we want to
get them around the top of the ring and back into the utricle. The maneuver goes like this:

  - Sit straight up
  - Turn the head 45 degrees to the right
  - Keeping the turn, lay back fairly quickly, letting the head hang below the sholders
  - After the nystagmus subsides, remain lying down and turn the head toward the opposite side
  - After the next wave of nystagmus subsides, roll onto your left side, keeping your
    head turned toward your left shoulder
  - After the next wave of nystagmus subsides, lift your body to a sitting position
 
 To see why this works, try the procedure on the model head below. The model
 has two loose crystals in his right canal. The controls are tricky, but if you
 get the sequence right, they will land on the green "utricle" and be stable
 there as long as the head stays upright.

<!-- <div id="epley_container" width="600" height="400" onClick="go()" style="position:relative"> -->
<!--   <p id="click_to_start" style="position:absolute">Click to start</p> -->
<!--   <img id="instructions" src="/images/2019-12-20-instructions.svg" style="position:absolute"/> -->
<!-- </div> -->

<iframe srcdoc="
<html>
<body style='margin:0px'>
<div id='epley_container' onClick='go()' style='position:relative'>
  <p id='click_to_start' style='position:absolute'>Click to start</p>
  <img id='instructions' src='/images/2019-12-20-instructions.svg' style='position:absolute'/>
</div>
<script src='/js/cannon.js'></script>
<script src='/js/three.js'></script>
<script src='/js/TrackballControls.js'></script>
<script src='/js/epley.js'></script>
</body>
</html>
" width="600px" height="410px"></iframe>
